# Choose a Gemini client

This page lists common starting points. It is not a "best client" ranking — different clients suit different setups. If you have corrections or additions, please contact us.

## Desktop (GUI)
Graphical clients. A good first choice if you prefer a familiar browser-like feel.

### Lagrange
Cross-platform (Windows, macOS, Linux). One of the most actively maintained GUI clients. Features include bookmarks, subscriptions (Atom/Gemini feeds), history, and multiple tabs. Good starting point for most newcomers.
=> gemini://skyjake.fi/lagrange/ Lagrange home capsule

### Kristall
Cross-platform GUI client (Windows, macOS, Linux). Supports Gemini, Gopher, Finger, and HTTP. A good option if you want one client for multiple small-web protocols.
=> https://github.com/MasterQ32/kristall Kristall on GitHub (web link)

### Alhena
Cross-platform GUI client (Windows, macOS, Linux). A lightweight option for browsing Geminispace.
=> https://github.com/mochaman/alhena Alhena on GitHub (web link)

### Castor
Linux/BSD desktop client (GTK). Simple and lightweight. Less feature-complete than Lagrange but easy to get running.
=> gemini://git.sr.ht/~julienxx/castor Castor on Sourcehut

## Desktop / Terminal (TUI)
Terminal-based clients. Good for Linux/Debian users, SSH sessions, and low-resource setups.

### Amfora
Cross-platform terminal client (Linux, macOS, Windows). Supports tabs, subscriptions, bookmarks, and themes. A common first choice for terminal users.
=> gemini://hserc.xyz/amfora Amfora info (check for current repo)

### Bombadillo
Terminal client with support for Gemini, Gopher, and plain HTTP. Useful if you want one tool for multiple small-web protocols.
=> https://tildegit.org/sloum/bombadillo Bombadillo on tildegit (web link)

### Gmni
Minimal command-line client. No interactivity — useful for scripting or quick checks, not day-to-day browsing.
=> https://git.sr.ht/~emersion/gmni gmni on sourcehut (web link)

## Mobile

### Deedum
Available for Android and iOS. Basic but functional; actively maintained as of last review. A reasonable starting point for mobile newcomers.

### Ariane
Android-only. Another common option for Android users.

### Elaho
iOS-only (check App Store availability and maintenance status).

## Notes
* Clients handle TLS trust (TOFU) differently — you may be prompted to accept a certificate on first visit. This is normal.
* Some clients support feed subscriptions (Gemini feeds / Atom); others do not.
* If one client feels confusing, try another — they vary quite a bit in interface style.
* Check each client's repository for current maintenance status before installing.

=> /clients/ Back to clients
=> / Back to main page

Last reviewed: 2026-04-07
Corrections welcome: smdocs@pm.me
