# Gemini client and server libraries

A starting point for developers building Gemini software. This is not a complete list — it covers libraries commonly mentioned in Geminispace as of early 2026.

Availability and maintenance status change. Check each project for current state before using it.

## Finding libraries

The best current indexes of Gemini software:

=> gemini://gemini.circumlunar.space/software/ Gemini software list (circumlunar)
=> gemini://gemplex.space/ Gemplex (search and directory)

These are more up to date than anything here. Use this page as a starting point, then verify.

---

## By language

### Go

Go is widely used for Gemini server and client implementations. Several full server projects (Molly Brown, gemserv) are written in Go and can be read as implementation references. Go's crypto/tls package handles the TLS layer well.

Search for "gemini" on pkg.go.dev for current library options.

### Rust

Agate (server) is written in Rust and is one of the most actively maintained Gemini projects. The Rust async ecosystem (tokio) handles TLS and TCP cleanly.

Crates.io has several Gemini-related crates — search for "gemini" to find current options for both client and server use.

### Python

Jetforce is a Python framework for building dynamic Gemini applications. If you want a server that lets you write Python request handlers (similar to a WSGI app), Jetforce is the primary option.

For client-side use, there are several Python Gemini client libraries. Search PyPI for "gemini" — filter carefully, the name overlaps with unrelated packages.

### C

gmid and gmnisrv are both written in C. Both are readable codebases and useful as implementation references.

libtls (from LibreSSL) or OpenSSL handle the TLS layer in C implementations.

### Other languages

Gemini libraries exist for Ruby, Perl, JavaScript (Node), PHP, and others. The circumlunar software list is the most reliable index. Maintenance varies widely.

---

## Implementing a minimal client

A Gemini client at its simplest:

1. Open a TLS connection to the server on port 1965
2. Send the request URL followed by \r\n (max 1024 bytes total)
3. Read the response header (first line, terminated by \r\n)
4. Parse the two-digit status code and META string
5. For 2x responses, read the body
6. Implement TOFU: store the server's certificate fingerprint and warn on changes

The minimal viable client is a few hundred lines in most languages. The TLS handling is the most complex part.

## Implementing a minimal server

A minimal static file server:

1. Listen on port 1965 with TLS
2. For each connection, read the request URL (up to 1024 bytes, up to \r\n)
3. Parse the URL path
4. Map the path to a file on disk
5. If the file exists, respond with "20 text/gemini\r\n" + file contents
6. Handle 51 (not found) and other error cases
7. Close the connection

CGI, virtual hosting, and redirects are incremental additions on top of this baseline.

=> /developing/protocol-overview.gmi Protocol reference

=> /developing/ Back to developing index

Last reviewed: 2026-04-07
Corrections welcome: smdocs@pm.me
