# Gemini protocol overview

A practical summary of the Gemini protocol for developers building clients, servers, or tools. This is not the authoritative spec — it is a working reference for common implementation needs.

The canonical specification is maintained at gemini.circumlunar.space (check the /docs/ path). When in doubt, the spec takes precedence over this page.

## The basics

Gemini is a request/response protocol over TLS. Each transaction is one request and one response, on a single connection that closes when the response is complete.

* Port: 1965 (default)
* Transport: TLS (required — no plaintext fallback)
* One request per connection (no pipelining, no keep-alive)

## Request format

A Gemini request is a single line:

```
<URL>\r\n
```

Maximum length: 1024 bytes including the \r\n.

The URL must be an absolute URL (including the scheme). Example:

```
gemini://example.com/page.gmi\r\n
```

That is the entire request. No headers, no method, no version string.

## Response format

A Gemini response starts with a header line:

```
<STATUS> <META>\r\n
```

* STATUS — a two-digit number
* META — interpretation depends on the status code
* Followed by \r\n

For success responses (2x), the body follows immediately after the header line. There is no blank line separator — the body starts right after the \r\n.

For all other responses, there is no body.

## Status codes

### 1x — Input required
The server is asking the client for input. META is a prompt string displayed to the user.

* 10 — Input
* 11 — Sensitive input (client should not echo input, e.g. passwords)

The client re-sends the same URL with the user's input appended as a query string.

### 2x — Success
META is the MIME type of the body.

* 20 — Success

For Gemini pages: META is typically `text/gemini; charset=utf-8`. The body is gemtext.

### 3x — Redirect
META is the new URL.

* 30 — Temporary redirect
* 31 — Permanent redirect

### 4x — Temporary failure
META is a human-readable error message. The client may try again later.

* 40 — Temporary failure (generic)
* 41 — Server unavailable
* 42 — CGI error
* 43 — Proxy error
* 44 — Slow down (META contains wait time in seconds)

### 5x — Permanent failure
META is a human-readable error message.

* 50 — Permanent failure (generic)
* 51 — Not found
* 52 — Gone
* 53 — Proxy request refused
* 59 — Bad request

### 6x — Client certificate required
* 60 — Certificate required
* 61 — Certificate not authorised
* 62 — Certificate not valid

## TLS requirements

TLS is mandatory. There is no plaintext mode.

Gemini does not require certificates to be signed by a CA. Clients typically use TOFU (trust on first use): they accept any certificate on first connection and remember it, warning on changes.

Minimum TLS version: 1.2. TLS 1.3 is preferred.

SNI (Server Name Indication) must be sent by the client. Servers use SNI to select the correct certificate when virtual hosting.

## Gemtext MIME type

The MIME type for gemtext is:

```
text/gemini
```

The charset parameter is optional but recommended:

```
text/gemini; charset=utf-8
```

A server can serve other MIME types (images, plain text, etc.) over Gemini — the client receives them as downloads or inline depending on the client's implementation.

## Client certificates

Gemini includes support for client certificates (6x response codes). This is used for access control and stateful applications (like login flows) without cookies or sessions.

If a client certificate is present, it is passed as TLS client authentication. Servers can read the certificate's subject and expiry to authorise or identify the client.

## What Gemini does not have

By design:
* No HTTP-style headers
* No cookies
* No client-side scripting
* No caching directives
* No content negotiation

These omissions are intentional. The protocol is meant to stay small.

=> /developing/ Back to developing index

Last reviewed: 2026-04-07
Corrections welcome: smdocs@pm.me
