# Reading & discovery

Gemini is decentralised. Discovery works differently than the web — there are fewer large hubs, and more directories, aggregators, and word-of-mouth. This page is a starting map, not a complete list.

## Search engines

Gemini search engines index a subset of known capsules. Results and freshness vary.

### GUS (Gemini Universal Search)
One of the earliest and most well-known Gemini search engines. Indexes gemtext pages.
=> gemini://gus.guru/ GUS

### Kennedy
A search engine focused on Gemini content.
=> gemini://kennedy.gemi.dev/ Kennedy search

### Marginalia
An independent search engine that indexes the small web, including Gemini. Also has a web interface.
=> gemini://search.marginalia.nu/ Marginalia (Gemini)

Note: No Gemini search engine has complete coverage. Trying more than one is common practice.

## Aggregators (new posts / feeds)

These collect recent posts from capsules that publish Atom or Gemini feeds.

### CAPCOM
A feed aggregator for Gemini capsules. Requires capsules to publish a valid feed to appear.
=> gemini://gemini.circumlunar.space/capcom/ CAPCOM

### Antenna
Another Gemini feed aggregator. Capsule operators can submit their feed URL to be included.
=> gemini://warmedal.se/~antenna/ Antenna

## Curated directories

Human-maintained lists of capsules. Useful for finding active, interesting content without relying on search.

### The Gemini Quickstart / Community pages
The original Gemini project page includes links to community spaces and a casual capsule list.
=> gemini://gemini.circumlunar.space/ gemini.circumlunar.space (Gemini project home)

### Station (social directory)
A lightweight social space where Gemini users can post updates and follow each other. Useful for finding active capsules.
=> gemini://station.martinrue.com/ Station

## Tips for finding things

Start with a search engine and a directory. When you find a capsule you like, check if they link to other capsules — word-of-mouth and blogroll-style links are common.

Many capsule operators publish a "links" or "friends" page. These are often better curated than any automated index.

If a capsule has a feed, add it to a client that supports subscriptions (Lagrange, Amfora) to follow new posts over time.

Last reviewed: 2026-04-07
Corrections welcome: smdocs@pm.me
