# Hosting your first capsule

This is a beginner-friendly overview of your options. It does not cover every server or setup — it covers common starting points.

## Hosted capsule providers

The simplest path: someone else runs the server, you upload content. Good while you are learning gemtext and deciding whether you want to self-host later.

### flounder.online
A hosted capsule service. Free accounts available. You write gemtext in a web editor or upload files via a simple interface. No server administration required.
=> gemini://flounder.online/ flounder.online

### srht.site / tildepages
Some "tilde" communities (shared Unix servers) offer Gemini hosting as part of membership. You get a shell account and a home directory that is served over Gemini.
=> gemini://tilde.team/ tilde.team (check for Gemini hosting details)

Check each provider for current availability, storage limits, and terms before signing up.

## Self-hosting

More control, more responsibility. You run the server software on a machine you manage.

### What you need
* A server reachable from the internet (a VPS works; home hosting requires port forwarding or a tunnel)
* Port 1965 open in your firewall
* A TLS certificate
* A Gemini server binary

### TLS certificates

Gemini requires TLS. Unlike HTTPS, Gemini does not use certificate authorities by default — clients use TOFU (trust on first use). This means you can use a self-signed certificate.

To generate a self-signed certificate (valid for 10 years, adjust as needed):

```
openssl req -x509 -newkey rsa:4096 \
  -keyout key.pem -out cert.pem \
  -days 3650 -nodes \
  -subj "/CN=yourhostname.example"
```

Replace yourhostname.example with your actual hostname or IP address.

Some server software can generate a certificate for you on first run — check your server's documentation.

### Common server options

#### Agate
Simple, easy to configure. Written in Rust. A common first choice for self-hosters.
=> gemini://qwertqwerf.com/agate/ Agate (check for current project page)

#### Molly Brown
Written in Go. More configurable than Agate, with support for CGI and virtual hosting.

#### gmid
Written in C. Minimal and fast. Supports CGI and virtual hosting.

Start with Agate or Molly Brown if you are new to self-hosting. Both have straightforward configuration.

### Basic directory layout

A minimal capsule:

```
/var/gemini/         ← or wherever your server's root is
  index.gmi          ← your homepage
  about.gmi
  posts/
    index.gmi
    2026-04-01-hello.gmi
```

Your server will be configured to serve files from a root directory. Requests for gemini://yourhost/ map to index.gmi in that root.

### Keeping it simple

You do not need dynamic content, a database, or a build system to run a capsule. A folder of .gmi files is enough.

Update content by editing files and copying them to your server (scp, rsync, or whatever you prefer).

A basic update workflow:

```
rsync -av /local/capsule/ user@yourserver:/var/gemini/
```

## Backups

At minimum: keep a local copy of everything in your capsule root. If you are on a VPS, periodically rsync or scp the files back to your machine.

Gemini capsules are typically small. A full backup is quick.

## What to put in your first capsule

A simple starting point:
* index.gmi — introduce yourself or the capsule's purpose
* about.gmi — optional, but useful
* One post or page of actual content

You do not need to wait until it is "ready." A sparse capsule is fine. You can grow it over time.

Last reviewed: 2026-04-07
Corrections welcome: smdocs@pm.me
