# Publishing (writing gemtext)

Gemtext is intentionally simple — there are only a handful of line types. This page is a practical starter guide.

## The line types

Gemtext is line-oriented. Each line has a type determined by its prefix (or lack of one).

### Text
A plain line with no prefix is a paragraph. Keep paragraphs short — gemtext readers vary and there is no word-wrap guarantee across clients.

### Headings
Three levels, using # characters at the start of the line:

```
# Heading 1
## Heading 2
### Heading 3
```

Use headings to break up longer pages. Most capsules stay at one or two heading levels.

### Links
Links are their own line, starting with =>:

```
=> gemini://example.com Link text here
=> gemini://example.com/page.gmi Another link
```

Link text is required and should describe the destination — clients often display links as a list, so "click here" is not useful.

You can also link to other protocols:
```
=> https://example.com A web link
=> gopher://example.com A gopher link
```

### Lists
Lines starting with * are unordered list items:

```
* First item
* Second item
* Third item
```

There are no ordered lists or nested lists in gemtext. If you need numbered steps, write them as plain text lines ("1. Do this", "2. Do that").

### Blockquotes
Lines starting with > are blockquotes:

```
> Something worth quoting.
```

### Preformatted blocks
Wrap preformatted content in ``` lines. Content inside is rendered as monospace and not parsed:

```
` ``
Some code or ASCII art here.
Line breaks and spacing are preserved.
` ``
```

(Remove the extra space after the backtick — that is just to show the example.)

Everything inside is treated as literal text. The opening ``` can include an alt-text label for screen readers:

```
` ``alt text description
...content...
` ``
```

## Writing for readability

Short paragraphs work better than long ones — gemtext has no word wrapping standard.

Descriptive link text matters. Clients often extract links into a separate list. "Read more" as link text is useless out of context.

Avoid deeply nested structure. Gemtext does not support it well and readers do not expect it.

## Organising a capsule

A typical starting layout:

```
index.gmi        ← root page, links to everything
about.gmi        ← who you are, what this capsule is
posts/           ← a folder for posts or articles
  index.gmi      ← list of posts with links
  2026-04-01-first-post.gmi
```

Keep your index.gmi honest — it is the first thing visitors see.

An about.gmi is optional but appreciated, especially if your capsule is not obviously self-explanatory.

## Linking across protocols

You can link to Gopher, HTTPS, or other targets. Clients handle these differently — some open them in a browser, some warn the user, some refuse.

A common practice is to note when a link leaves Gemini:

```
=> https://example.com Some reference (web link)
```

## File extension

Gemini files typically use .gmi or .gemini. Most servers and clients recognise both; .gmi is more common in practice.

Last reviewed: 2026-04-07
Corrections welcome: smdocs@pm.me
