# Gemini status codes

Gemini responses begin with a two-digit status code. This page explains what they mean in practice.

The first digit is the category. The second digit provides more detail.

## 1x — Input required

The server is asking you to provide input before it can respond.

### 10 — Input
The server wants you to type something (a search query, a username, etc.). Your client should show a prompt.

### 11 — Sensitive input
Same as 10, but the server is signalling that the input is sensitive (e.g. a password). Your client may hide what you type.

## 2x — Success

### 20 — Success
The most common response. The server is returning content. The rest of the header includes the MIME type (usually text/gemini for .gmi pages).

## 3x — Redirect

The resource has moved. Your client should follow the redirect automatically.

### 30 — Temporary redirect
The content is temporarily at a different address.

### 31 — Permanent redirect
The content has permanently moved. Update any bookmarks you have.

## 4x — Temporary failure

Something went wrong, but it may be worth trying again later.

### 40 — Temporary failure (generic)
Unspecified temporary problem on the server side.

### 41 — Server unavailable
The server is overloaded, under maintenance, or temporarily offline.

### 42 — CGI error
The server runs CGI scripts and one of them failed.

### 43 — Proxy error
The server was acting as a proxy and the upstream request failed.

### 44 — Slow down
The server is rate-limiting you. The response includes a number of seconds to wait before retrying.

## 5x — Permanent failure

Something is wrong that is unlikely to be fixed by retrying.

### 50 — Permanent failure (generic)
Unspecified permanent problem.

### 51 — Not found
The requested resource does not exist at this address. The capsule equivalent of HTTP 404.

### 52 — Gone
The resource existed but has been permanently removed. Unlike 51, this explicitly signals that it was intentionally removed.

### 53 — Proxy request refused
The server does not allow proxying to the requested host.

### 59 — Bad request
The server could not parse your request. Usually a client issue.

## 6x — Client certificate required

The server requires you to identify yourself with a client certificate.

### 60 — Certificate required
You need to provide a client certificate to access this resource. Your client should offer to create or select one.

### 61 — Certificate not authorised
You provided a certificate, but this server does not recognise or accept it.

### 62 — Certificate not valid
You provided a certificate, but it is expired or otherwise invalid.

## Notes

Gemini status codes are simpler than HTTP — there are no 100-level informational codes, no 200-level sub-codes for created/accepted/etc., and no complex caching directives. The protocol intentionally keeps this minimal.

If your client shows an error code you do not recognise, the first digit tells you the general category.
=> /troubleshooting/certificates.gmi Certificates & trust (TOFU, client certs)
=> /troubleshooting/ Back to troubleshooting index

Last reviewed: 2026-04-07
Corrections welcome: smdocs@pm.me
