# Dynamic content with CGI

CGI (Common Gateway Interface) lets your Gemini server run a script or program to generate a response dynamically, instead of serving a static file.

Not all Gemini servers support CGI. Servers that do: Molly Brown, gmid, Jetforce (its own handler model). Agate does not support CGI.

## How it works

When a request maps to a CGI script, the server:

1. Executes the script as a subprocess
2. Passes request details via environment variables
3. Sends the script's stdout back to the client as the Gemini response

The script must produce a valid Gemini response: a status line followed (for 2x responses) by the body.

## Gemini environment variables

The server sets these before running the script:

* GEMINI_URL — the full requested URL
* SERVER_NAME — the hostname
* SERVER_PORT — usually 1965
* PATH_INFO — the path component of the URL
* QUERY_STRING — the query string (everything after ?)
* REMOTE_ADDR — the client's IP address
* TLS_CLIENT_CERT — the client's certificate (if one was presented)
* AUTH_TYPE — set to "Certificate" if a client cert is present

Some servers set additional variables. Check your server's documentation.

## A minimal CGI script

A shell script that returns the current time:

```
#!/usr/bin/env bash
set -euo pipefail
echo "20 text/gemini"
echo ""
echo "# Current time"
echo ""
date
```

The first line of output is the Gemini header: status code, a space, then the MIME type (or meta string). Then a blank line, then the body.

Save this as a file in your CGI directory (e.g. /var/gemini/cgi/time.sh), make it executable:

```
chmod +x /var/gemini/cgi/time.sh
```

Then configure your server to treat that path as CGI. In gmid:

```
server "yourdomain.example" {
	cert "/etc/gmid/cert.pem"
	key  "/etc/gmid/key.pem"
	root "/var/gemini/yourdomain"

	location "/cgi/*" {
		cgi on
	}
}
```

## Handling query strings

If a visitor submits input (via a 1x input prompt), the input lands in QUERY_STRING.

A script that greets by name:

```
#!/usr/bin/env bash
set -euo pipefail

if [ -z "$QUERY_STRING" ]; then
    echo "10 What is your name?"
    exit 0
fi

NAME="$QUERY_STRING"
echo "20 text/gemini"
echo ""
echo "# Hello, $NAME"
```

The first response (status 10) prompts the user for input. On the second request the name is in QUERY_STRING.

Note: QUERY_STRING is URL-encoded. For anything beyond simple input, decode it in your script or use a language with URL-decoding support.

## Security considerations

CGI scripts run as the server process's user. Keep that in mind:

* Sanitise any input from QUERY_STRING before using it in shell commands
* Do not pass QUERY_STRING directly to a shell command (command injection risk)
* Use a dedicated low-privilege user to run your Gemini server

Avoid constructs like:

```
# Unsafe — do not do this
result=$(some-command $QUERY_STRING)
```

Pass input as a quoted argument or process it in a language with proper parsing.

## Alternatives to CGI

SCGI is a variant with lower overhead for high-traffic setups. gmid supports SCGI. For most Gemini capsules, CGI is sufficient.

=> /operating/server-comparison.gmi Comparing Gemini servers
=> /operating/virtual-hosting.gmi Virtual hosting

=> /operating/ Back to operating index

Last reviewed: 2026-04-07
Corrections welcome: smdocs@pm.me
